(lively music)
(keyboard clacking)
We're going to implement a max heap
meaning that the values of the parents
are always greater than or equal to their children.
If you wanted to implement a min heap,
it would be pretty trivial to convert the code to do that.
You just have to change the comparisons
that are being done in the code.
Heaps are usually implemented as arrays
and so, that's how we're going to do it
as we went through in the last slide,
so I've created a project
and I'm going to need a class for the heap,
so let's create that.
So I'll say New, Java Class
and I'll just call it Heap.
And we're going to need two fields in our heap class,
the array and the next available position
so that when we insert an item,
we can just go straight to that index
and insert the newValue.
So, we'll say private int heap
and private int size
and then in our constructor, we just need
to create and initialise the array
and we'll let the caller tell us
how big they want the heap to be.
So, we'll let them pass as a capacity
and we'll just say heap equals new int capacity.
So, one of the things we're gonna need to do
when we insert a node is check to see
whether the heap is full
and the heap is full when the size equals the length
of the array and so, we're gonna create an isFull method,
so we'll say public boolean isFull
and we're gonna return size equals heap.length.
And so, if the number of items we have in the heap
is equal to the size of the array,
then the heap is full.
If the heap is full, there are two approaches.
We can throw an exception and say sorry, the heap is full
or we could resize the array.
So, let's add a utility method
for getting the parent for an element in the array,
so we'll say public int getParent
and we're gonna need the index of the element
in the array that we wanna get the parent for
and we're just gonna return that expression
that we looked at, so we're gonna say return index
minus one over two.
We don't need to use floor
because we're using integers
and when you do division with integers,
it will be rounded down automatically.
It'll be rounded down to the lowest whole number
and so, if the result of a division is 7.5,
it just drops the .5 and returns you seven.
So, in Java, doing integer division,
you're already flooring the result
and so, we don't have to explicitly call floor
and so, let's start writing our insert method.
And remember that when we insert a node,
we always put it at the end of the array,
that's why we're tracing the size
so that we know where the next available position will be
and so, we'll say public void insert
and we'll want the value that we wanna insert.
Now, we're going to just throw an exception
if the heap is full.
We're not gonna bother resizing the array,
so we're gonna say if isFull
throw new and we're just gonna throw
an IndexOutOfBoundsException,
with heap is full
'cause basically what the caller is asking us to do
is to add a node into an array
and we don't have room for it
and so, we're just gonna say IndexOutOfBounds,
we can't add any more items into the heap.
If that isn't the case, the first thing we'll do
is put the new item at the first available spot,
so we're gonna say heap size++ equals value.
And so, we're using the post increment operator
so that the current value of size will be used
and then after the value has been assigned,
size will be incremented to the next available position.
So, now we have to potentially heapify
or fix the heap because the value we inserted
might be greater than its parent.
Now this is a max heap,
so we're going to check
whether it is greater than its parent
and if it is, we're gonna swap it with its parent
and then we're gonna rinse and repeat
until the value isn't greater than its parent
or we hit the root
and so, the value has become the root
and at the point, the heap will be fixed.
All of the nodes in the heap will be smaller
than their parents.
I'm gonna write a method called fixHeapAbove
because you're gonna see later
when we do delete that we have look down the heap
to fix it and so, I'm gonna write
a method called fixHeapAbove.
Of course, when we're heapifying after an insert,
we're looking up the tree
'cause we're starting with the value
and then we're gonna be comparing it
to its parents and so, we're travelling up the tree
to heapify it and that's why I'm gonna call it fixHeapAbove.
So, I'll say private void fixHeapAbove
and we want the index of the value
that we've just inserted,
so that's where we wanna start.
So, we're gonna say int newValue equals heap index.
So, this is the value that we just inserted.
And then we're gonna say while index is greater than zero
because if index hits zero, we've hit the root,
it means the newValue is the root.
So, if we haven't done that
and newValue is greater than heap
and we're gonna call the getParent, getParent index,
and so, what we're doing here
is if we haven't hit the root,
then we're gonna compare the new value
against the value of its parent
and we call our method getParent
to get the index of the parent
and so, we just did the calculation we covered in the slides
and we checked the value there
and if the newValue has a greater value
than its parent, then we wanna swap the two values
and so, we're gonna say heap index
equals heap
getParent index and so, this is assigning the parent
to where the newValue currently lives
and then we're gonna say index equals getParent index.
You might be saying, wait a minute,
we haven't assigned the newValue
into where parent currently lives
but we'll do that at the final step.
So, basically in the slides,
I showed them swapping at each step
and that's conceptually what we're doing
but in the implementation, we're comparing the value
against its parent and if it's greater than its parent,
we assign the parent down,
we don't actually assign the value into that node
because we're gonna compare it against the parent
of that node and it might have to be swapped down.
So, we only actually assign newValue
when we have found its correct position,
so what we're doing is we're bubbling it up
and we're shifting parents down,
any parents that are less than the newValue
are shifting down and at the end,
there'll be the space where the newValue
is supposed to go and that's when we'll assign it
and so, we're gonna assign it when we drop out of the loop.
And so, we're gonna say heap index
equals newValue and we're done.
So, if the while condition is true,
we assign the parent value
to where we added the newValue
and then we update the index to the parent's position.
We don't assign the newValue into the parent's position yet
because we might not have found the correct position.
In the slides, I showed you conceptually what's happening
in terms of we're bubbling the newValue up
and we don't actually have to assign the newValue
every time we push a parent down.
We can just keep pushing parents down
and when we drop out of the loop,
whatever index it's pointing to
will be the spot where we're supposed to assign newValue.
So, as I said, it's not really all that complicated
on an insert to heapify the heap.
So, now that we have our fixedHeapAbove method,
the last thing we need to do in our insert method
is call it, so we're gonna say fixHeapAbove
and we're gonna pass the size
and because we're gonna do that,
I'm gonna actually not increment it here,
we're just gonna pass the size
and then I'll increment the size after we fix the heap.
Otherwise we'd have to subtract one from the size
and why do that?
So, what we're gonna do here
is we're passing the index
of where we've put the newValue
and you can see that when we come in to fixHeapAbove,
the first thing we do is get the newValue
that we just added.
And so, that's it for insert.
Not very complicated.
So, I'll see you in the next video.